[SPIRV][Doc] Add arbitrary precision floating and fixed point specs (#1934)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/SPIRV/SPV_INTEL_arbitrary_precision_floating_point.asciidoc

|`OpArbitraryFloatASinINTEL`              | 5873
|`OpArbitraryFloatASinPiINTEL`            | 5874
|`OpArbitraryFloatACosINTEL`              | 5875
|`OpArbitraryFloatACosPiINTEL`            | 5876
|`OpArbitraryFloatATanINTEL`              | 5877
|`OpArbitraryFloatATanPiINTEL`            | 5878
|`OpArbitraryFloatATan2INTEL`             | 5879
|`OpArbitraryFloatPowINTEL`               | 5880
|`OpArbitraryFloatPowRINTEL`              | 5881
|`OpArbitraryFloatPowNINTEL`              | 5882
|`OpArbitraryFloatCastINTEL`              | 5841
|`OpArbitraryFloatCastFromIntINTEL`       | 5842
|`OpArbitraryFloatCastToIntINTEL`         | 5843
|====

== Modifications to the SPIR-V Specification Version 1.5

After Section 3.16, add a new section "3.16a Subnormal Support" as follows:

=== Subnormal Support

Control whether subnormal support is enabled or not.

[options="header"]
[width="60%"]
[cols="15%,85%"]
|====
| Value ^| Subnormal Support (`OpTypeInt`)
| 0 | Flush subnormals numbers to zero on inputs and outputs
| 1 | Enable support for operating on subnormal numbers
|====

After Section 3.16, add a new section "3.16d Rounding Accuracy" as follows:

> === Rounding Accuracy

Reviewer: If I understand correctly, all instructions documented here have both "Subnormal Support" and "Rounding Accuracy" as literal arguments - this is a 8 bytes for storing 4 bits, which is kind of overkill.

This is not a major comment, but probably you will consider merging these two into a single bitmask and reducing amount of arguments of each new instructions.

The same applies to fixed-point extension

Author: This one's on me - we could change this, but since the translator is already using the preliminary spec, we'll have to circle back and update it there as well. Can we table this one for a later changelist? Also, do internal SPIR-V API changes need a deprecation period as well?

|====
| Value ^| Mode     ^| Behavior
| 0      | CORRECT   | Conform to the IEEE-754 standard for rounding accuracy
| 1      | FAITHFUL  | Allow some tolerance for error (within 1ULP of the IEEE-754 standard) for rounding. +
The returned result is one of the two floating point values closest to the mathematical result.

This mode is useful for devices that can trade CORRECT rounding for improved resource utilization.
|====

=== Capability
Modify Section 3.31, *Capability*, adding a row to the Capability table:

[options="header"]
|====
2+^| Capability ^| Implicitly Declares
| 5845 | *ArbitraryPrecisionFloatingPointINTEL* +

Allows the use of various operations for arbitrary precision floating-point math

| *ArbitraryPrecisionIntegersINTEL*, *Kernel* |
|====

=== Instructions

In Section 3.32.13, *Arithmetic Instructions*, add the following instructions:

[cols="12", width="100%"]
|=====
11+<|*OpArbitraryFloatAddINTEL* +

Two `OpTypeInts` representing two arbitrary precision floating point numbers (ihc_float) are passed in as _A_ and _B_ and the result of `A+B` is returned in _Result_.

_Result Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `1+Eout+Mout` and is the type of _Result_.

> _M*_ contains the width of the mantissa of the floating point types within _Result_, _A_, and _B_.

Reviewer: Personally, I would prefer to have clear mapping between literal and argument which it corresponds to, but I guess it could be inferred with current wording as well: `Mout` for result, `M1` for the first argument and `M2` for the second

Probably would be good to hear more feedback from someone else

Author: @AlexeySachkov any suggestions on what you would rename these to?

> Note that the exponent values (E1, E2, Eout) are inferred from the width of the `OpTypeInt`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the exponent values (E1, E2, Eout) are inferred from the width of the `OpTypeInt` used to represent corresponding arguments (_A_, _B_, _Result_)
```

I'm not sure that it is correct to refer to `OpTypeInt` in general, as you can have several of them within a module with different widths

_EnableSubnormals_ specifies whether subnormal numbers should be supported or flushed to zero before and after the operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16a_.

_RoundingMode_ controls the rounding mode for the result and is chosen from _Table 3.16_.

_RoundingAccuracy_ controls the accuracy of the rounding operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16d_.

| Capability:
*ArbitraryPrecisionFloatingPointINTEL*

> | 11 | 5846 | <id> Result Type | Result <id> | A <id> | _Literal_ M1 | B <id> | _Literal_ M2 | _Literal_ Mout | _Literal_ EnableSubnormals | _Literal_ RoundingMode | _Literal_ RoundingAccuracy

Reviewer 2: Same logic is applicable here.

_Result Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `1+Eout+Mout` and is the type of _Result_.

_M* contains the width of the mantissa of the floating point types within _Result_, _A_, and _B_.
Note that the exponent values (E1, E2, Eout) are inferred from the width of the `OpTypeInt`.

_EnableSubnormals_ specifies whether subnormal numbers should be supported or flushed to zero before and after the operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16a_.

_RoundingMode_ controls the rounding mode for the result and is chosen from _Table 3.16_.

_RoundingAccuracy_ controls the accuracy of the rounding operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16d_.

| Capability:
*ArbitraryPrecisionFloatingPointINTEL*
| 11 | 5849 | <id> Result Type | Result <id> | A <id> | _Literal_ M1 | B <id> | _Literal_ M2 | _Literal_ Mout | _Literal_ EnableSubnormals | _Literal_ RoundingMode | _Literal_ RoundingAccuracy
|=====

[cols="8", width="100%"]
|=====
7+<|*OpArbitraryFloatGTINTEL* +

Two `OpTypeInts` representing two arbitrary precision floating point numbers (ihc_float) are passed in as _A_ and _B_.
The two numbers are compared and a value of `true` is returned in _Result_ if `A > B`.
Otherwise, a value of `false` is returned.

> _Result Type_ must be a Boolean.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Result Type_ must be a Boolean type.
```

|=====

[cols="10", width="100%"]
|=====
9+<|*OpArbitraryFloatExp10INTEL* +

An `OpTypeInt` representing an arbitrary precision floating point number (ihc_float) is passed in as _A_.
The `10^(A)` of _A_ is returned as _Result_.

_Result Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `1+Eout+Mout` and is the type of _Result_.

_M* contains the width of the mantissa of the floating point types within _Result_ and _A_.
Note that the exponent values (E1, Eout) are inferred from the width of the `OpTypeInt`.

_EnableSubnormals_ specifies whether subnormal numbers should be supported or flushed to zero before and after the operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16a_.

_RoundingMode_ controls the rounding mode for the result and is chosen from _Table 3.16_.

_RoundingAccuracy_ controls the accuracy of the rounding operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16d_.

| Capability:
*ArbitraryPrecisionFloatingPointINTEL*
| 9 | 5866 | <id> Result Type | Result <id> | A <id> | _Literal_ M1 | _Literal_ Mout | _Literal_ EnableSubnormals | _Literal_ RoundingMode | _Literal_ RoundingAccuracy
|=====

[cols="10", width="100%"]
|=====

> 9+<|*OpArbitraryFloatExp1mINTEL* +

Reviewer 2: OpArbitraryFloatExpm1INTEL

|=====

[cols="10", width="100%"]
|=====
9+<|*OpArbitraryFloatATanPiINTEL* +

An `OpTypeInt` representing an arbitrary precision floating point number (ihc_float) is passed in as _A_.
The `arctan(A*pi)` is returned as _Result_.

_Result Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `1+Eout+Mout` and is the type of _Result_.

_M* contains the width of the mantissa of the floating point types within _Result_ and _A_.
Note that the exponent values (E1, Eout) are inferred from the width of the `OpTypeInt`.

_EnableSubnormals_ specifies whether subnormal numbers should be supported or flushed to zero before and after the operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16a_.

_RoundingMode_ controls the rounding mode for the result and is chosen from _Table 3.16_.

_RoundingAccuracy_ controls the accuracy of the rounding operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16d_.

| Capability:
*ArbitraryPrecisionFloatingPointINTEL*
| 9 | 5878 | <id> Result Type | Result <id> | A <id> | _Literal_ M1 | _Literal_ Mout | _Literal_ EnableSubnormals | _Literal_ RoundingMode | _Literal_ RoundingAccuracy
|=====

[cols="12", width="100%"]
|=====

> 11+<|*OpArbitraryFloatTan2INTEL* +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
11+<|*OpArbitraryFloatATan2INTEL* +
```

|=====

[cols="9", width="100%"]
|=====
8+<|*OpArbitraryFloatCastToIntINTEL* +

An `OpTypeInt` representing an arbitrary precision floating point number (ihc_float) is passed in as _A_.
It is type casted into an arbitrary precision integer with width `W` and returned as _Result_.

_Result Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `W` and is the type of _Result_.

_E1_ and _M1_ contain the width of the exponent and the mantissa of the floating point type of _A_.
Note that the exponent value (E1) is inferred from the width of the `OpTypeInt`.

_EnableSubnormals_ specifies whether subnormal numbers should be supported or flushed to zero before and after the operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16a_.

_RoundingMode_ controls the rounding mode for the result and is chosen from _Table 3.16_.

_RoundingAccuracy_ controls the accuracy of the rounding operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16d_.

| Capability:
*ArbitraryPrecisionFloatingPointINTEL*
| 8 | 5843 | <id> Result Type | Result <id> | A <id> | _Literal_ M1 | _Literal_ EnableSubnormals | _Literal_ RoundingMode | _Literal_ RoundingAccuracy
|=====

=== Validation Rules

> None.

Reviewer: Are you sure that there are no validation rules?

I think I can imagine at least a few:
- `M*` literal arguments can't contains values that exceed width of `OpTypeInt` of corresponding argument minus 1
- `M*` literal should contain value more than zero

It seems that there are no requirement to have arguments of the same width, but probably there are still some limitations related to this?

Note: the same applies to fixed-point extension

Author: Good point - added for floating point. Based on the discussion about what values `I` can take, I don't know if this applies to the fixed_point case. What do you think?

= SPV_INTEL_arbitrary_precision_floating_point

== Name Strings

SPV_INTEL_arbitrary_precision_floating_point

== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Headers

== Contributors

Ajaykumar Kannan, Intel

== Notice

Copyright (c) 2020 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

== Status

Initial Release

== Version

[width="40%",cols="25,25"]
|========================================
| Last Modified Date | {docdate}
| Revision           | 1
|========================================

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SPIR-V Specification Version 1.5, Revision 2.

This extension depends on the SPV_INTEL_arbitrary_precision_int spec.

== Overview

> _ihc_float_ is a datatype represented in SPIR-V using `OpTypeInt` that implements arbitrary precision floating point support.

Reviewer: It seems a bit strange that arbitrary precision floating-point type is built on top of integer type. I guess  [`OpTypeFloat`](https://www.khronos.org/registry/spir-v/specs/unified1/SPIRV.html#OpTypeFloat) can't be really used here, as it requires IEEE754 compliance - right?

> The bit pattern of a floating-point value is as described by the IEEE 754 standard.

I don't have strong objections against it, since the only thing you need is just a bits storage - all the semantic is encoded in operations and not in the data types, but still, this looks strange.

I think that having separate type would be better here: there is a term ["Floating-point type"](https://www.khronos.org/registry/spir-v/specs/unified1/SPIRV.html#Floating) in the spec, and these new arbitrary precision floating-point types **are not** floating-point types at all from the spec point of view. If you had them declared as floating-point types with some requirements to bit pattern (by referring to some other standard/spec or describing it here directly), you could easily get support for other arithmetic operations like [`OpFMul`](https://www.khronos.org/registry/spir-v/specs/unified1/SPIRV.html#OpFMul), for example. Note that its description doesn't refer to `OpTypeFloat`, but rather refers to `Floating-point type`, which means that it could be used for other floating-point types without adding new instructions or updating any wording.

Reviewer: > I'm not sure what the Width of the OpTypeFloat would imply about the size of the mantissa and exponents. Perhaps it was originally designed for the standard floating point types (e.g. half, single, double precision floats)?

Yes, it was for sure designed for standard floating-point types

> To your note, these operations do follow a type that is aligned very well with the IEEE spec, just that they provide the capability of using any arbitrary-sized mantissa/exponent, but the representation is in line with IEEE. So perhaps we should switch to using the OpTypeFloat with an extra parameter to clarify the size of the mantissa/exponent?

I think it should be okay to just use `OpTypeFloat` so new functions operate on actual floating-point type. Regarding encoding the size of the mantissa/exponent: it is probably okay to encode this in the operation itself. I.e. we re-use existing data type, which is in line with IEEE, but we provide new instructions that re-interpret it in a bit different way (length of mantissa/exponent is not a standard one)

Reviewer 3: In IR these parameters types are represented via ExtInt keyword. It may be confusing for a user that arbitrary length int is translated into SPIR-V as float type.

Author: I'll leave this as is for now. @AlexeySachkov what do you think?

Reviewer: > It may be confusing for a user that arbitrary length int is translated into SPIR-V as float type.

I'm a bit confused: this file states that arbitrary precision float is translated into SPIR-V as int type.

My suggestion were to align that, but I think it is not critical to leave that as-is

This datatype and its corresponding operations can be useful on targets that can take advantage of narrower representation such as FPGAs.

The datatype is additionally described with two parameters:

* _E_: represents the number of exponent bits
* _M_: represents the number of mantissa bits

The total width of the type is `E+M+1` where the last bit is used to represent the sign.
The data layout is shown below:

`[ S (sign bit) ][ E (Exponent) ][ M (Mantissa) ]`

> The width of the data `(E+M+1)` is encoded with the width of the `OpTypeInt`.

Reviewer: What about `Signedness` operand of `OpTypeInt`? Is it used? Please note that if `Kernel` capability is used in a module, than `Signedness` of `OpTypeInt` must always be 0.

Reviewer: > Would you like me to include that snippet in here well? 

I think it worth doing so

[cols="15%,20%,65%"]
|====
| Value ^| Mode     ^| Behavior
| 0      | CORRECT   | Conform to the IEEE-754 standard for rounding accuracy
| 1      | FAITHFUL  | Allow some tolerance for error (within 1ULP of the IEEE-754 standard) for rounding. +
The returned result is one of the two floating point values closest to the mathematical result.

This mode is useful for devices that can trade CORRECT rounding for improved resource utilization.
|====

=== Capability
Modify Section 3.31, *Capability*, adding a row to the Capability table:

[options="header"]
|====
2+^| Capability ^| Implicitly Declares
| 5845 | *ArbitraryPrecisionFloatingPointINTEL* +

Allows the use of various operations for arbitrary precision floating-point math

| *ArbitraryPrecisionIntegersINTEL* |
|====

=== Instructions

In Section 3.32.13, *Arithmetic Instructions*, add the following instructions:

[cols="14", width="100%"]
|=====
13+<|*OpArbitraryFloatAddINTEL* +

Two `OpTypeInts` representing two arbitrary precision floating point numbers (ihc_float) are passed in as _A_ and _B_ and the result of `A+B` is returned in _Result_.

_Result Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `1+Eout+Mout` and is the type of _Result_.

> _A Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `1+E1+M1` and is the type of _A_.

Reviewer: You don't have `E1` listed in instruction operands

_B Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `1+E2+M2` and is the type of _B_.

> _E*_ and _M*_ contain the width of the exponent and the mantissa of the floating point types within _Result_, _A_, and _B_.

Reviewer: Same here: `_E*_` is not present in instruction operands list

Note that the exponent values (E1, E2, Eout) are inferred from the width of the `OpTypeInt`.

_EnableSubnormals_ specifies whether subnormal numbers should be supported or flushed to zero before and after the operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16a_.

_RoundingMode_ controls the rounding mode for the result and is chosen from _Table 3.16_.

_RoundingAccuracy_ controls the accuracy of the rounding operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16d_.

| Capability:
*ArbitraryPrecisionFloatingPointINTEL*

> | 13 | 5846 | <id> Result Type | Result <id> | <id> A Type | A <id> | _Literal_ M1 | <id> B Type | B <id> | _Literal_ M2 | _Literal_ Mout | _Literal_ EnableSubnormals | _Literal_ RoundingMode | _Literal_ RoundingAccuracy

Reviewer: I'm curious, why `A Type` operand is required? If I understand correctly, there should be no problems with inferring type of operand `A` (same for `B`)

Author: I spoke to Mikhail on Friday and I agree that the types for _A_ and _B_ should be inferrable from the context, so I'm going to remove them. New commit should be going up shortly.

Author: @mlychkov @AlexeySachkov should we make this change for the fixed point types as well (removing the input types)?

Reviewer 3: Yes, I think that it is better to align this format of instructions for both specs.

Author: Done :)

_E*_ and _M*_ contain the width of the exponent and the mantissa of the floating point types within _Result_, _A_, and _B_.
Note that the exponent values (E1, E2, Eout) are inferred from the width of the `OpTypeInt`.

_EnableSubnormals_ specifies whether subnormal numbers should be supported or flushed to zero before and after the operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16a_.

_RoundingMode_ controls the rounding mode for the result and is chosen from _Table 3.16_.

_RoundingAccuracy_ controls the accuracy of the rounding operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16d_.

| Capability:
*ArbitraryPrecisionFloatingPointINTEL*
| 13 | 5881 | <id> Result Type | Result <id> | <id> A Type | A <id> | _Literal_ M1 | <id> B Type | B <id> | _Literal_ M2 | _Literal_ Mout | _Literal_ EnableSubnormals | _Literal_ RoundingMode | _Literal_ RoundingAccuracy
|=====

[cols="13", width="100%"]
|=====
12+<|*OpArbitraryFloatPowNINTEL* +

Two `OpTypeInts` representing arbitrary precision floating point number (ihc_float) and arbitrary precision integer number are passed in as _A_ and _B_ respectively.
The value of `A^B` is returned in _Result_ where `B` is an integer of arbitrary size.

> _Result Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `1+E+M` and is the type of _Result_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_Result Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `1+Eout+Mout` and is the type of _Result_.
```

Note that the exponent values (E1, Eout) are inferred from the width of the `OpTypeInt`.

_EnableSubnormals_ specifies whether subnormal numbers should be supported or flushed to zero before and after the operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16a_.

_RoundingMode_ controls the rounding mode for the result and is chosen from _Table 3.16_.

_RoundingAccuracy_ controls the accuracy of the rounding operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16d_.

| Capability:
*ArbitraryPrecisionFloatingPointINTEL*
| 10 | 5841 | <id> Result Type | Result <id> | <id> A Type | A <id> | _Literal_ M1 | _Literal_ Mout | _Literal_ EnableSubnormals | _Literal_ RoundingMode | _Literal_ RoundingAccuracy
|=====

[cols="10", width="100%"]
|=====
9+<|*OpArbitraryFloatCastFromIntINTEL* +

An `OpTypeInt` representing an arbitrary precision integer is passed in as _A_.
It is type casted into an arbitrary precision floating point number with the new specification (Eout, Mout) and returned as _Result_.

_Result Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `1+Eout+Mout` and is the type of _Result_.

_A Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `W` and is the type of _A_.

> _E*_ and _M*_ contain the width of the exponent and the mantissa of the floating point types within _Result_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_Eout_ and _Mout_ contain the width of the exponent and the mantissa of the floating point type of _Result_.
```

Note that the exponent value (Eout) is inferred from the width of the `OpTypeInt`.

_EnableSubnormals_ specifies whether subnormal numbers should be supported or flushed to zero before and after the operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16a_.

_RoundingMode_ controls the rounding mode for the result and is chosen from _Table 3.16_.

_RoundingAccuracy_ controls the accuracy of the rounding operation and is chosen from _Table 3.16d_.

| Capability:
*ArbitraryPrecisionFloatingPointINTEL*
| 9 | 5842 | <id> Result Type | Result <id> | <id> A Type | A <id> | _Literal_ Mout | _Literal_ EnableSubnormals | _Literal_ RoundingMode | _Literal_ RoundingAccuracy
|=====

[cols="10", width="100%"]
|=====
9+<|*OpArbitraryFloatCastToIntINTEL* +

An `OpTypeInt` representing an arbitrary precision floating point number (ihc_float) is passed in as _A_.
It is type casted into an arbitrary precision integer with width `W` and returned as _Result_.

_Result Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `W` and is the type of _Result_.

_A Type_ is an `OpTypeInt` of width `1+E1+M1` and is the type of _A_.

> _E*_ and _M*_ contain the width of the exponent and the mantissa of the floating point types within _A_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_E1_ and _M1_ contain the width of the exponent and the mantissa of the floating point type of _A_.
```

> Note that the exponent values (E1) are inferred from the width of the `OpTypeInt`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that the exponent value (E1) is inferred from the width of the `OpTypeInt`.
```

|=====

> 8+<|*OpArbitraryFloatCastFromIntINTEL* +

Reviewer 3: Cols number should be increased by 1.

| Capability:
*ArbitraryPrecisionFloatingPointINTEL*

> | 8 | 5842 | <id> Result Type | Result <id> | A <id> | _Literal_ Mout | _Literal_ FromSign | _Literal_ EnableSubnormals | _Literal_ RoundingMode | _Literal_ RoundingAccuracy

Reviewer 3: Number of SPIR-V words should be increased by 1.

|=====

> [cols="9", width="100%"]

Reviewer 3: The same here: Cols number for this table and number of SPIR-V words should be increased by 1.
